[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi.
It's James here,
from "Food Matters."
And welcome to this
FMTV special with Rupy
from "The Doctor's Kitchen."
And you can check him out
at TheDoctorsKitchen.com,
also follow some of these
awesome recipes on Instagram.
And Rupy is a medical doctor.
He practices general medicine.
He's also practiced
emergency medicine as well,
and he's trying to
bring inspirational food
and nutritional advice to the
mainstream medical system,
in particular the
NHS here in the UK.
I admire him for his
passion and determination
in sticking with
it, and I'm really
inspired to speak with him
today to learn about some
of his practices for helping
inspire people to eat better
and also some tips
for staying healthy.
So check it out.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm a general practitioner,
an emergency doctor,
and I set up something called
"The Doctor's Kitchen,"
which is basically a YouTube
channel and social media
platforms where I teach
people the use of nutrition
in medicine and how I'm trying
to inspire people that food is
medicine.
And it's actually something I
started because of my patients,
but my colleagues-- my
medical colleagues are all
interested in this
sort of thing.
We're now getting tons of
emails from medical students,
like, where'd you get
this knowledge from?
And yeah, I just started
it on the back of that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There's been a couple of
catalysts throughout my life
that have sort of led
me to this sort of path.
The first one, I think, was
when my mom got ill herself.
So she had anaphylaxis,
and from an unknown cause.
There wasn't really
a reason as to why
she kept on getting these
anaphylactic episodes.
And if you don't know
what anaphylaxis is,
it's basically where your
blood pressure goes down.
You have a severe
allergic reaction.
We usually have to treat
it with adrenaline.
She had every single
test you can think of.
Every single doctor, professor,
immunology, everything, and we
couldn't really find
out what the reason was.
So back then-- this is going
back, like, 15 years ago.
She essentially put herself
on an elimination diet.
This is when I was in
early teens, like, 13, 14.
And she would only have greens.
She would only
have whole grains.
She wouldn't have dairy.
She wouldn't have meat,
nothing for about a year,
and anaphylaxis just went.
And that was always in
the back of my mind.
We never really talked about it
when I was growing up too much,
not really the research she
put into it, or the emphasis
or anything like that.
But that was always in
the back of my head.
When I went to med
school, I was like,
you can use food
in a medicinal way.
I don't really understand it,
and I didn't get the answers
to that throughout med school.
But that was always at
the back of my head.
And then I actually
got ill myself as well.
So I suffer something called
atrial fibrillation, so
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.
My heart rate goes to
180 beats per minute.
Feel dizzy, get a little
bit of shortness of breath.
Used to have it weekly.
There were some triggers.
Sometimes it could be a glass
wine, sometimes a heavy meal,
sometimes a night shift in A&E.
I would just flip into this,
and it would last, like, four
or five hours, or even 12 hours.
And again, every single
test under the sun.
I had the
electrophysiology studies,
the wire that goes
into your groin,
looks at your heart to see
if there's any aberrant
connections, aberrant
electrical impulses.
Couldn't find anything.
So what the
discussion led to was
I should have an ablation,
which is basically
where you put a
wire into the heart
and you burn around an
area of the pulmonary vein
where usually these cells fire.
And I thought about it,
and I had discussion
with a bunch of cardiologists.
And my mom, obviously, being the
naturopathic sort of influence
she is, she said, look, just
try things with your diet
and just see what happens.
So I basically tried a
whole bunch of things--
detoxed completely, no caffeine,
no alcohol, clean diet,
exercise.
Nothing worked, to be honest.
But after about six months
of drinking spirulina
and chlorella, and
really focusing
on a plant-based
whole diet, it sort of
went away for about
two or three years.
And I can count
the number of times
I had AF on one hand in a year.
going from once a week, there's
certainly been a correlation.
And I can't really explain
that, and no medical person
can explain it, no
cardiologist or anything.
So it's quite it's
quite interesting how
we have these sort
of experiences
and it changes the trajectory.
So those were the two main
catalysts, but then also
patients.
So my patients who come
in to me in my GP office
and say, look, I've got IBS,
I've got autoimmune disease.
Is anything in my diet
that can change that?
And the general
answer for a clinician
is, there isn't evidence
to suggest anything.
So I have to do my research.
I have to teach
myself nutrition.
I had to read all the
clinical journals.
I had to go to all the
global conferences looking
at the science behind
nutrition to make sure I'm not
doing any harm as a clinician.
You know, I've taken
an oath, do no harm.
So anything that
I say is has got
to have an evidence
base behind it.
And I used to just get
really late in my clinics,
talking to people
about recipes, talking
to people about what
things they should
be putting into their diet.
I'd always be the guy
people would go to
for nutrition
advice, so I thought,
there's got to be an easier way.
And that's why I started
"The Doctor's Kitchen," which
is YouTube tutorials and
recipes and making it engaging.
I'm not an authoritative person.
I don't want it to be
like a prescriptive thing.
I want you to be empowered
and inspired to look
for these foods yourself.
And when you go to
your supermarket,
you're looking at the greens,
you're looking at the colors.
You're realizing that
this is information.
This can impact your genes.
This can impact your DNA makeup.
This can impact on your blood
sugar regulation and everything
else, and to appreciate the
concept of bioindividuality
as well.
So it's been a bit
of a journey so far.
I'm very junior in
it, but it's exciting.
Yeah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I haven't figured out why
nutrition doesn't play a bigger
role in medical education.
I went to one-- and
I'm not bragging here,
but I went to one of the best
medical schools in the world.
It's renowned for its
research capability,
and we only got, like, less
than 11 or 12 hours in nutrition
in the whole of the six-year
course that I went to.
And it was kind
of a shock for me
when I did my own research
after qualifying as a doctor,
after going to quite well
established medical university,
that there was all this
information out there
that wasn't being given to us.
And we were being taught the
same dogma, the same things
about saturated
fats, the same thing
about having a largely
carbohydrate, starch-based diet
for everyone.
It was a bit of a wake up call.
I can't really
answer the question
as to why we're not
using this information.
But what I can say
is that using myself
as a platform and
collective people
in the sort of wellness
sphere will bring it
more to the forefront,
and that's actually
one of the things that I want to
bring into medical education--
culinary medicine, teaching
medical students how to cook,
teaching them the
beauty of food,
and inspiring them that
disease prevention and disease
treatment can be
hand-in-hand with nutrition.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I was quite worried about
the backlash, if you like,
or the response from
my medical colleagues,
not so much my patients.
I think my patients would
have like really appreciated
their doctor being
enthusiastic about food, trying
to help them, because that's
essentially what we all do,
that we're all trying to do.
But the response my colleagues
has been really good so far.
You've got a few people
are saying, how can you
treat hay fever with matcha
teas or increasing your greens
and stuff.
If you use the evidence,
if I'm saying everything
with an educated, unbiased
opinion, then people,
they pick up on that.
They understand it.
They understand where the
passion is coming from.
And there is a real
hunger these days.
There is a real interest from
the medical community in food
and medicine, and
I'm latching onto it
and I'm just putting
information out there.
So it's been really encouraging.
It's been a really good journey.
And I've met so many people
as well in this world
like, obviously, yourself,
"Food Matters" and everything.
But across the world,
just being able to talk
to people on the same
wavelength, share ideas.
The response for
a doctor cooking
has been really interesting,
actually, really good
because there's so much to
be said for talking about it,
talking about putting
greens in your diet.
But if you show people that
you are doing yourself,
you're more motivated
to tell them about it,
but they're more motivated to
say, my doctor's doing this.
My doctor is cooking.
He's in the kitchen.
It's got to be important.
So yeah, that's sort of the
line I'm trying to take.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think there's two ways.
One, the quality of the research
is always under scrutiny
when it comes to
nutritional medicine.
It's really hard to use
certain qualities of research
to base cost-benefit analysis
on real generalizing changes
to a big, bureaucratic,
monolithic organization
like the NHS, for example.
You've got to have some
real solid evidence.
It's a bit of a
contentious issue
because even the
evidence that we've
based a lot of our
nutritional guidelines on,
you wouldn't bet your house on.
But it's looking at the
quality of nutritional research
that's coming up from
nutrition journals,
it isn't always there.
You've got RCTs, Randomized
Controlled Trials,
which are, like, the base
of what everything looks at,
and meta analysis
and everything else.
What we look at a lot of
like food questionnaires,
and there's a lot of
inherent bias with that.
So people are incline
knob to believe that.
The other thing-- and I think
this is the bigger factor--
is that once you've been
taught a certain way
from the medical establishment,
from peers that you hold
in the highest regard, you're
going to defend your thinking
and the medical establishment
as much as possible.
And I've been
victim to this well.
When I found out about ketotic
diet for the first time
or low carbohydrate, high
fat, my initial gut reaction
is, that's wrong.
That's a fad.
This is what I've been taught.
This is what my esteemed
professor taught me
in medical university.
And you just defend
it automatically.
You automatically
antagonize anyone
that questions your
own understanding.
And as a medical professional,
that's even heightened, I find.
But really, when you go
down to the nuts and bolts
and you look at the
evidence, and you
listen to people-- as
a general practitioner,
you're client facing.
You're not just one of a huge
study of thousands of people.
These are individuals.
You realize the impact
of bioindividuality.
You realize the impact of
one nutritional guideline
doesn't apply to everyone.
There's some people that
have a high propensity
to insulin resistance.
There's some people
that survived
culturally, ethnically, their
background, on a high-fat diet.
And this is what we
need to listen to.
So it's a really
difficult one, but I
think going to the
future, we'll be able to--
we'll learn to recognize
our patients as individuals.
And I think that
will pave the way
for more nutritional guidance
and better nutrition guidance.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think there's certainly--
despite the bioindividuality
argument, there are certain
nutritional principles
that people can always look at,
and that is, in this climate,
reducing your refined
carbohydrates and sugars.
We have a huge, huge
dependency-- in this country,
globally, in lots of different
health care systems--
we have a huge dependency
on carbohydrates,
and that needs to change.
And we need to
look at our bowls.
We need to look out
plates and see colors.
And the reason
why I say colors--
and it sounds a bit hippie, and
it sounds real alternative--
is because that's where
the phytocompounds are.
This is where your
minerals and nutrients are.
And when you look at
the biochemical pathways
of, for example, your
liver, you realize
the catalyzers, the
enzymatic process,
are dependent on things
like minerals and vitamins
and amino acids of
certain branches.
And this is what we need to
be educating our patients on.
So I recommend
colorful bowls where
you've got the full complement
of all the different nutrients
that plant-based
diets can offer you.
I'm not fully plant-based.
I appreciate the
fact that everyone's
got their own individual taste
when it comes to veganism
or if there's animal.
I have meat about two,
three times a week,
but that works for me.
I used to eat two or
three times a day meat.
But I realized that was having
a definite impact on me.
And to afford the
quality of meat I want,
it would be exceedingly
expensive as well.
So a colorful bowl is
definitely what I recommend.
Eating within
certain time periods,
to stop the late night
snacking, to stop the eating
throughout the whole day because
that leads to insulin spikes.
And that leads to
resistance, and that
can lead to fat deposition,
all the rest of it.
So as a general rule
of thumb, I always
recommend a 12-hour
eating window,
whether that be 7:00 AM to
7:00 PM or 8:00 AM to 8:00 PM.
Outside those windows,
you don't eat.
So there's that second thing.
The third thing is it's
not related to food.
It's actually sleep.
So your circadian rhythms
are really, really important
when it comes to eating
because that determines--
when you eat, it determines
your circadian rhythm.
That has an effect on
melatonin, all these
are the hormones that have
massive impact on your weight,
and then, ultimately,
your health as well.
Hydration-- so hydration
is really important.
We're probably under
hydrating ourselves,
and there is a
focus on making sure
that we're having enough water.
There is a balance,
under hydration
versus over hydration.
I drink about 1
1/2 to two liters,
but it's dependent on
the person as well,
and depending on
medical conditions.
I wouldn't want
to be recommending
someone who's got heart failure
with two liters of water
per day.
It's really individual.
Those are the basic
steps I would say,
and then making
sure that you do--
actually, make sure you do have
a good quality source fats.
Fats are something that has
been demonized for years.
Even when I was at
medical college,
saturated fats are bad for you.
Polyunsaturated, plant-based
oils are good for you.
Now we know that the
complete reverse,
and actually, we should
be encouraging people
to look at the
quality of their fats
rather than the quantities
of monounsaturated
versus saturated fats
and all the rest of it.
So nuts, seeds, beans, oils,
extra-virgin olive oil,
coconut oils, these
are all great things
to put in your diet.
And again, it comes through
bioindividuality with how much
should you put into it.
So those are the basic
principles-- colorful bowls,
hydration, good quality fats,
and good quality proteins
as well.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I would cook a meal for whoever
the current prime minister is
right now in the NHS because--
in the NHS, in England--
because if I can convince them
and empower them and inspire
them that good food can be
beneficial for your health
and taste amazing,
maybe that will
have an effect on
government policy,
and maybe that
would change the era
that we're in right
now when it comes
to getting better nutrition and
better nutrition education in
and around the
NHS, which is sort
of what I'm about right now.
I would definitely cook probably
something like a nourish bowl.
So it would be a really
good complement of greens
on one side, probably
bok choy, which
has got really good evidence
towards its anticancer ability,
lots of different
peppers and colorful veg,
so probably some
tomatoes that have
been braised with a little
bit of sundried tomato,
and herbs as well.
So I'd probably use
rosemary because it's
got rosmarinic
acid, and that's got
really good evidence
towards it's
an anti-inflammatory effects.
And with a side of
whole grain, so I'd
probably use either amaranth or
quinoa in a whole grain form,
but making sure that the
proportions of the bowl kind of
reflect how I think
we should be eating.
So the carbohydrate
portion probably
wouldn't reflect more than
15% or 20% of the bowl,
and the rest would be colors.
And then probably--
she's a meat eater--
some good quality, locally
sourced fish, so maybe
something from Scotland
or maybe from Cornwall.
We've got some really good crab.
So again, I'm setting
all the flavors
to kind of reflect what we're
good for in Britain here today.
So everything would be
local because I believe
in SLOP-y foods, so sloppy
standing for Seasonal Local
Organic and Phytochemical-rich.
Those are SLOP-y foods.
There's a real good
scientific evidence
as to why we should
be eating seasonal,
why we should be local.
And it's really about
connecting the medical world
to the wellness world.
There's a nice little vacuum
in the middle where, actually,
there is science behind this.
There a science behind what
the wellness community's been
saying for a number of years.
We just need to marry them up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'm reading Dr. Greger's
"How Not To Die."
Have you heard of it?
It is a fantastic book.
Dr. Greger is probably
someone after my own heart.
He is a medical professional,
he's done the medical training,
and he's come to
the same conclusions
about how nutrient dense
food is the key to health.
And he's basically
systematically gone
through in his
book different ways
in which we can prevent
and treat disease,
which is amazing, right?
There's a clear bias towards--
we're saying he's very much
in the plant-based diet,
very much in veganism.
I think someone
from the meat world
must have annoyed him,
like, 20 years ago,
and he's basically made
it his goal in life
to completely destroy
the meat industry.
But that aside, what
he says in the book,
everything is evidence based.
The links, the research
is amazing for someone
who's geeky like me
and likes to read paper
after paper to make sure they're
doing their patients no harm,
it's great.
Phenomenal book, and
I'd encourage everyone
to read it with an open mind.
Take everything with
a pinch of salt.
Even stuff that I say I always
encourage people to take it
with a pinch of salt.
One thing that's
quite humbling about
this whole journey
is medical professionals
aren't always right.
We're not always right.
And it's recognizing that and
being a skeptic of ourselves
that we actually
learn and we progress
as a scientific community,
as a well community,
as people that are trying
to instigate change
around the world, globally.
This is much bigger
than individuals.
This is much bigger than
medical institutions.
It's a huge, huge project.
And I think just having
that perspective really
is the instigator
for a lot of change.
I've been practicing for--
I studied for six
years, been practicing
for about seven years, and
I've come to this conclusions
already.
But maybe it's because I had
an open mind through med school
as well.
I'm not too sure.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's actually meditation.
So it's something
that I'm trying
to incorporate a lot more
in what I tell patients.
So I start with
food because I think
it's a delicious introduction
into the wellness industry.
If I can convince
you that this food is
going to be healthy
for you, maybe you'd
be open to other ideas.
And the other thing
is mindfulness.
So mindfulness, meditation,
those sorts of practices
are really, really important.
So when I'm tired and
I'm feeling a bit groggy,
or I'm thinking about, well,
maybe a coffee will perk me up,
I sit in my chair.
I find a quiet space.
It's quite hard in London,
but I find a quiet space,
close my eyes, and I have this
active restful period where
I concentrate on breathing,
try and empty my mind,
but not try too hard.
And I just I just
let everything flow
and just calm my inner state.
And then I find after that
10-minute or 11-minute period,
I feel really refreshed.
It's quite interesting.
I was taught to meditate when my
mom back when I was a teenager.
You can tell she's
the alternative type.
I was taught to
meditate back then.
I kind of forgot the practice.
And when I was in Sydney,
I met a guy, Tim Brown,
who you might know.
He taught me how
to meditate again,
and I spent a weekend with him.
And just working
on breath work is
something that's incredibly,
incredibly powerful.
And there is the scientific
evidence behind it as well.
There's some research
that Dr. Deepak Chopra
did with the UCSD looking
at telomerase activity
after telling people to
meditate for six weeks.
Six weeks, that's unheard of.
And affecting your
genetic makeup
through telomerase
activity, it's
mind boggling,
absolutely mind boggling.
But mindfulness-- and
there's tons of apps
that I tell people
to use as well.
It's a great tool.
It's a really great tool.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'm definitely on team smoothie.
So I would never want
to drink more than I
can eat in a single sitting.
So even when I do a smoothie,
all the different recipes I do,
I put half a banana in, or I
put a little bit of date in,
or I put a little bit
of apple or berries
because the sugar content, even
though it's a natural sugar
and it's paired with minerals
and vitamins, the antioxidants,
it's still acting as
a sugar in your body.
So it's still like the
refined white stuff.
So I'm definitely
on team smoothie.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
How do I break my fast?
So in the mornings,
I do it very gently,
and I do it with a green drink.
I'm going to sound like a proper
alternative hippie right now.
But a green drink, and it's got
it's spirulina, chlorella in,
a bit of Himalayan
rock salt as well.
I have that first
thing in the morning.
I have about a liter
of it, and I've always
done that, actually,
about just under a liter.
So I've got my hydration quota
for the day straightaway.
then like I probably
exercised fasted,
and then I have my shower.
And then I'll have
something quite light.
So this week, actually, I've
started just boiling an egg,
and then having a
green salad with that
with some extra virgin olive
oil and a little bit of spices.
A lot of people find that
quite counterintuitive
because they're used to having
a sweet cereal or something
sweet in the morning
to get them going.
I find that's probably the
worst thing you want to do.
So I do something very
low sugar in the morning
because I want to keep
my insulin level stable,
and I probably have a bit
more fat in the morning
as well because that's what
I kind of want to burn off.
When I ask someone about their
diet, I say, how's your diet?
And they say, it's all right.
It's pretty healthy.
And I say, tell me what
you had for breakfast.
Cereal, toast, milky
coffee with sugar.
Alarm bells are ringing.
What did you have for lunch?
Sandwich, maybe two sandwiches.
What did you have dinner.
Oh, sometimes I treat myself.
I'll have a pasta dish.
And I'm just thinking,
it's carb, carb, carb.
And when I see a
patient, I'm kind
of visualizing their insulin
level, their glucose level,
and there's just
huge spikes, spikes.
And you're never allow
your insulin to go down.
This is the problem,
and this is why
we rely on caffeinated drinks.
This is why we rely on
snacking and craving.
We reach for those sweets,
and this is a problem.
I see it in the NHS a
lot of the time, where
the nurses go for the
chocolates, and the doctors
as well.
And I used to be one of them.
But yeah, so I have
a focus when I tell
patients what I do it myself--
nuts, seeds, high fats in
the morning, lots of protein,
and you'll be good.
You'll be sweet for the day.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My legacy-- I want my
legacy to be introducing
the concept of culinary medicine
to medical schools up and down
the country.
This is what I want to do.
This is what I kind
of had an epiphany
moment of what I meant to be
doing with this whole project.
At the start it was
just to get-- my aim
at the start was to get
1,000 of my patients
watching the YouTube channels
and changing their diet.
That was my aim.
Now I'm blowing
that out the water.
I'm thinking a lot, lot bigger.
This is this whole bridge is
a lot bigger than just me.
It's about changing the emphasis
on nutrition and medicine
going forward.
I want the future doctors,
the first thing to say
is, what are you eating?
What are you eating?
That's the first thing that
doctors should always ask.
And we're not going to do that
unless we teach the doctors
nutrition and we teach them,
in my opinion, how to cook.
Because If you can
cook, like I can
and like some of
my colleagues can,
you are more likely to inspire
and emphasize the importance
of nutrition to your patients.
You're more likely
to motivate them
you're more likely to empower
them and educate them yourself
because if you're
doing yourself and you
can see the benefits of it, you
can really reap the benefits
yourself, you're
going to be shouting
about it, which is actually
what I'm doing right now, right?
So yeah, that's my focus.
And I'm actually having
some really cool meetings
with some people in America
who started a nutrition course.
But essentially, the nutrition
course I want to create
is something that is accepted
by the medical community,
so it has to be affiliated
with universities.
It has to be affiliated with
the royal colleges, GPs,
anesthetists, everyone because
unless you convince them,
then you're not going
to convince everyone.
So yeah, that's essentially
what I want to do,
the pioneering face of
nutrition medicine in the UK.
[MUSIC PLAYING]